Cloud enables sharing of resources remotely. Services can be 
accessed remotely.

Chracteristics of cloud:

1. On demand service : Gmail service can be accessed from
 anywhere and anytime using gmail account credentials.

2. Scalability : servers can be scaled up and down as per our
  requirement.

3. Broad network Access

4. Resource Pooling : All the resources are kept together like a 
pool.You can use as many resources as you want.

consider it like  a swimming pool. Person 1 wants a bucket of 
water from pool wherea as person 2 wants two buckets of water
from the pool.

5. Measured services : To estimate how many persons visited 
website on a particular day? How many laptops were purchased ?
All these kinds of services are provided by cloud.



Cloud Service Providers

1. AWS
2. Microsoft AZURE
3. Google Cloud
4. AliBaba
5. Oracle........etc.



Serices provided by cloud
------------------------------------------------
Layers based on which services are classified:


Application 
Data
Runtime
Middleware
OS
Virtualization
Server
Storage
Network


1. SaaS - From infra to the application , you have taken 
 everything from cloud.


Application 
Data
Runtime
Middleware
OS
Virtualization
Server
Storage
Network


2. PaaS - you get infra + platform

e.g. you want to work with MS Office, for that you need a hardware
i.e. laptop (infra)  and a platform ( runtime environment) i.e.
OS so that you can run/use MS Office App. on it.

you are getting all of these in PaaS service.

Runtime
Middleware
OS
Virtualization
Server
Storage
Network

3. IaaS - you are getting all of these in IaaS service.
 Infra means hardware.
 Network means gateway,router,switches...etc.
 Storage means memory space to save data. 
 Server is needed to provide services. e.g. whatsapp server will
 provide services like chatting, calling , etc.
 So, network,storage and server all are being virtualized and 
 is being provided by IaaS and  not physically.

OS
Virtualization
Server
Storage
Network

          

CLOUD DEPLOYMENT MODELS
---------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Public ( AWS,Azure, Google Cloud)

It is accessible to everyone, one can create an account and  get 
access to the services.

2. Private ( enterprise cloud)

e.g. Dell created a private cloud to be used at its head office
and branches across world.

private clouds are more secure than public ones  but here  you 
will have to manage everything by yourself.



3. Hybrid Cloud (public + private)

It is a combination of both public as well as private. e.g.
An organization has stored some of its data on public cloud and
some confidential data on private cloud and can give its access
to some other person.




Certifications
--------------------------------------------------------------
level 1 - AWS Solution Architect

a. Associate
b. Professional

level 2 - AWS DevOps (developer + operations)

a. Associate
b. Professional

level 3 - AWS SysOps (System admin + operations)

a. Associate
b. Professional






Terms:
------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Instance : Virtual computing environment ( virtual server )

2. AMI : Amazon Virtual Image (types of OS) 
   Preconfigured templates for your instances.

3. Instance Types : various configuration of CPU,memory,storage,
and networking capacity for your instance known as instance types.

4. Key-pairs  :  AWS generally provides two types of keys-public
and private .Key-pairs are secure login information for your 
instances.This means your instances are password protected.

5. Instance Storage Volumes : Storage  volumes(space) for 
temporary data that's deleted when you stop/terminate your
instance.


6.Elastic IP Address : Static IPv4 addrresses for dynamic cloud
 computing.


7. Regions  and availability zones : Regions are physical /
 geographic locations across the world. Availability zones can 
 be understood as data centers in the region. A region can have
 multiple availability zones.



EC 2 service : Elastic Cloud Computing 
----------------------------------------------------------------
Instance : virtual server for running application on Amazon AWS.
It can be understood as tiny part of a large computer which has
its own HD ,network connection,OS,etc . but it is all virtual.

How will you get an instance (virtual server on AWS) ?

> using EC2 , 

Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) is a web service that 
provides resizable compute service in cloud , servers in 
Amazon's data centersâ€”that you use to build and host your 
software systems.


Why EC2 ?

> because it is cost effective,scalable,flexible - no need to 
set up anything , everything available with 100% configuration




Types of instances :


All reference types,memory optimized,storage optimized,micro 
instances, General purpose, GPU reference( for graphics).




Instance Pricing Models:

1. On demand : pay for as long as you use 

2. Dedicated : complete server is alloted to you , not sharable 

3.On-spot :for short duration only, you pay the amount more than
 the bit amount that some other individual has paid, in the mean
 time if someone pays more than amount paid by you ,the instance
 will be taken away from you. This is generally for testing 
purpose.

4. Reserved : you define time period for which you want the 
instance, and pay for that.








EC2 characteristics
------------------------------------------------------------

1.The word compute is important. virtual server is a computing
resource. Computing means something that has processing power
and ability to read and understand the instructions. 
who can tell that 10 + 10 is 20 .If you give some code of C or 
Java ,it can execute it and tell its output.


2.Amazon EC2 provides scalable computing capacity in AWS cloud.
You can use EC2 to launch as many or few instances as you need,
configure security and networking and manage storage.



3. It enables you to scale up/down the instances. This means 
increasing the capacity and computing power of existing instance
rather than increasing the number of instances.


4. There are two storage options : EBS and instance store

EBS ( Elastic BLock Store) : It is kept far from physical server.
It is network attached. Server is kept at some other location 
and EBS is located elsewhere . EBS is attached to the server
through network.

Instance Store volume is faster as it is directly attached to 
the server. IT is expensive and only for large servers.

It can be understood as laptop having SSD HD and an external
memory storage for storing movies,etc.  

SSD HD is Instance Store 
external memory storage is EBS.



5. Preconfigured templates are available known as Amazon Machine
Image (AMI).



6. Instance Types 

  a. General purpose instance : balanced memory+CPU

  b. compute optimized : more CPUs

  c. High memory optimized : High RAM,uses nitro system
     nitro syatem is a specialized hypervisor used for
     virtualization which  utilizes your resources intelligently.

  d. Storage optimized :low latency

  e. Accelerated computing (GPU) : where performance is required ( games)

  f. Memory optimized : More RAM





INSTANCE TYPES
------------------------------------------------------------------

1. General Purpose Instances

General Purpose instances provide a balance of compute,memory,
and networking resources and canbe used for a variety of 
workloads.
You will get average configuration.

Available in four sizes : Nano,small,medium,large


3 servers:

a. A series - A1
(medium , large)

b. M series - m4,ms,ms5ad,m5d
(large)

c. T series - T3c,T3,T2 (t2-micro- free tier)








EC2 ACCESS
------------------------------------------------------------------

1. To access instances, you need a key and key pair name.

2. You can download the private key only once.

3. Public key is saved by AWS to match it to the key pair name 
and private key when you try to login to the EC2 instances.

4. Without key pair ,you can't access instance in RDP ( Remote
Desktop Connection ) or SSH(linux).

5. There is a limit to create EC2 instances per region - 20
instances per region. You can submit a request to AWS to increase
it.






EC2 STATUS CHECKS
-------------------------------------------------------------

1. By default, AWS EC2 service performs automated check every
one minute.
If the instance state is pending, it is considered as unhealthy
state when EC2 does not get any response from your instance.
This is done on every running instances to identify any hardware
or software issue.

2. Status check is built into aws  ec2 instance. They cannot be
configured,deleted, or disabled.






STEPS TO LAUNCH AN INSTANCE
-----------------------------------------------------


An AWS instance can be launched in 7 steps:

Step 1. Choose an AMI ( OS/platform )

Amazon has preinstalled all types of OS on multiple servers. And
they take a backup of server(image) and keep at some location in
data centers.
When we select an AMI ,we get a soft copy of OS from that image.

There are 4  options to choose an AMI :

1. Quick start : this includes most commonly used AMIs provided 
by amazon itself.

2. My AMIs :  custom EMIs that you have created as per your need.

3. AWS MarketPlace : place from where you can purchase various 
 AMIs that you need in your instance.

4. Community AMIs : Here you will find  a number of AMIs belonging
 to a particular community. e.g AMIs belonging to Red Hat community.



Step 2: Choose an instance type. ( configuration )

selecting various configurations of CPU,memory,storage, and
networking capacity for your instance known as instance types.



Step 3: Configure Instance details.

create  network ( HTTP,HTTPS,SSH) , port no, IP address, etc.



Step 4: Add Storage. ( number of instances)


Step 5: Add Tags.

 You will launch many instances.You will need to define a name
 so that you can recognise it.


Step 6: Configure Security Group.

Step 7: Review -> Launch.